# 6.1 - Air Medical Transport

* EMS personnel may request Air Medical Transport (AMT) when operational conditions exist and/or the indicated clinical conditions are present.
* The use of AMT is determined by the prehospital provider with the highest medical level providing patient care. It should not be determined by police or bystanders.

**Operational Conditions**

* When a patient meets the defined clinical criteria listed below and the ground transport time to the closest hospital capable of providing definitive care (e.g., Level I or 2 trauma hospital, PCI center, stroke center) exceeds the ETA of air medical transport, OR
* Patient location, weather, or road conditions preclude the use of ambulance, OR
* Multiple patients are present that will exceed the capabilities of local hospitals and agencies.

**Clinical Conditions**

* Severe respiratory compromise with respiratory arrest or abnormal respiratory rate.
* Circulatory insufficiency: sustained systolic blood pressure <90 mmHg in both children and adults or other signs of shock.
* Cardiac arrest.
* Neurologic compromise: total GCS ≤ 13, or motor component <5. If the patient’s neurologic status improves above these limits, consider canceling the helicopter and transporting to the local hospital.
* Trauma: All penetrating injuries to head, neck, torso, and extremities proximal to elbow or knee; chest wall instability or deformity (e.g., flail chest); two or more proximal long-bone fractures; crushed, degloved, mangled, or pulseless extremity; amputation proximal to wrist or ankle; pelvic fracture; open or depressed skull fracture; paralysis.
* Major burns with greater than 20% BSA and/or inhalation injury with risk of airway compromise.
* Electrocution injuries with loss of consciousness, arrhythmia, or any respiratory abnormality.
* STEMI: If 12-lead ECG indicates a STEMI (e.g., machine reads _**Acute MI Suspected**_ and/or Paramedic interpretation), per your local STEMI plan.
* Stroke: 1 or more abnormal signs of the stroke scale; per local stroke plans.
* Critically ill children, including those with chronic and/or special healthcare needs.
