# 6.2 - Crime Scene

If you have been dispatched to a possible crime scene, including motor vehicle incidents, or if you believe a crime has been committed, immediately contact law enforcement.

Protect yourself and other EMS personnel. You will not be held liable for failing to act if a scene is not safe to enter. Once a crime scene is deemed safe by law enforcement, initiate patient contact and medical care if necessary.

* Have all EMS providers use the same path of entry and exit, if feasible.
* Do not walk-through fluids.
* Do not touch or move anything at a crime scene unless it is necessary to do so for patient care (notify law enforcement prior to moving so if possible).
* Observe and document original location of items moved by crew.
* When removing patient clothing, leave it intact as much as possible.
  * Do not cut through clothing holes made by gunshot or stabbing.
* If you remove any items from the scene, such as impaled objects or medication bottles, document your actions and advise a law enforcement official.
* Do not sacrifice patient care to preserve evidence.
* Consider requesting a law enforcement officer to accompany the patient in the ambulance to the hospital.
* Document statements made by the patient or bystanders on the EMS patient care report.
  * Comments made by a patient or bystanders should be denoted in quotation marks.
* Inform staff at the receiving hospital that this is a “crime scene” patient.
* If the patient is obviously dead consistent with Termination of Life Protocol, notify law enforcement of decision not to initiate resuscitation/patient care.
* At motor vehicle incidents, preserve the scene by not driving over debris, not moving debris and parking away from tire marks, if feasible.
