# 6.4 - Termination of Life

**WHEN NOT TO START**

Resuscitation efforts should be withheld under the following circumstances:

* SCENE SAFETY: The physical environment is not safe for providers.
* DEAD ON ARRIVAL (DOA): A person is presumed dead on arrival when all five “Signs of Death” are present AND at least one associated “Factor of Death” is present.

**Signs of Death (All five signs of death must be present):**

* Unresponsiveness.
* Apnea.
* Absence of palpable pulses at carotid, radial, and femoral sites.
* Unresponsive pupils.
* Absence of heart sounds.

**Factors of Death (At least one associated factor of death must be present):**

* Damage or destruction of the body incompatible with life, such as:
  * Decapitation.
  * Decomposition.
  * Deforming brain injury (Exposed Brain Matter)
* Major blunt or penetrating trauma.

**WHEN TO STOP**

* Termination of resuscitation MAY BE considered if return of spontaneous circulation does not return before transport is initiated.

Resuscitation may be stopped under the following circumstances:

* The physical environment becomes unsafe for providers.
* The exhaustion of EMS providers.
* The automatic external defibrillator has advised “no shock” on 5 sequential analyses and ALS/hospital care is not available within 15 minutes (hypothermia is an exception).
* There is no return of spontaneous circulation after 15 minutes of either BLS alone or combined BLS and ALS in the absence of hypothermia.

<details>

<summary><strong>DETERMINING DEATH IN THE FIELD</strong></summary>

When efforts to resuscitate are not initiated or are terminated under the above provisions, EMS providers shall:

* Document time of death.
* Notify law enforcement.
* Consider the possibility of a crime scene and restrict access.
* Any decision to move the body must be made in collaboration with law enforcement and the medical examiner.

</details>

{% hint style="warning" %}
* Prolonging resuscitation efforts, beyond 15 minutes, without a return of spontaneous circulation is usually futile, unless cardiac arrest is compounded by hypothermia or immersion in cold water.
* EMS providers are not required to transport every victim of cardiac arrest to a hospital. Unless special circumstances are present, it is expected that most resuscitations will be performed on-scene until the return of spontaneous circulation or a decision to cease resuscitation efforts is made based on the criteria listed under “when to stop” (above). Transportation with continuing CPR may be justified if hypothermia is present or suspected. Current AHA guidelines state: “cessation of efforts in the out-of-hospital setting…should be standard practice.”
{% endhint %}
