# 5.2 - Restraints

<table data-full-width="true"><thead><tr><th>Paramedic Standing Orders</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td><p><strong>Indications</strong></p><ul><li>Any patient who may harm himself, herself, or others may be restrained to prevent injury to the patient or crew. Restraining must be performed in a humane manner and used only as a last resort, Soft restraints for Medic and handcuffs for LEO</li></ul></td></tr><tr><td><p><strong>Procedures</strong></p><ul><li>Request law enforcement assistance, as necessary.</li><li>When appropriate, attempt less restrictive means of managing the patient, including verbal de-escalation.</li><li>Ensure that there are sufficient personnel available to physically restrain the patient safely.</li><li>Restrain the patient in a lateral or supine position. No devices such as backboards, splints, or other devices may be placed on top of the patient. Never hog-tie a patient. In order to gain control, the patient may need to be in a prone position, but must be moved to supine or lateral position as soon as possible.</li><li>The patient must be under constant observation by the EMS crew at all times. This includes direct visualization of the patient as well as cardiac, pulse</li><li>If a patient is restrained by law enforcement personnel with handcuffs or other devices that EMS personnel cannot remove, a law enforcement officer should accompany the patient to the hospital in the transporting ambulance. If this is not feasible, the officer MUST</li></ul></td></tr></tbody></table>
