# 3.5 - Spinal Trauma \[a]

<table data-full-width="false"><thead><tr><th>Paramedic Standing Orders</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td><ul><li>Routine patient care.</li><li>Maintain manual in-line stabilization during assessment.</li><li>Minimize spinal movement during assessment and extrication.</li><li>Self-extrication by a patient is allowable if the patient is capable.</li><li>A long backboard, scoop stretcher, vacuum mattress, or other appropriate full length extrication device may be used for extrication if needed.</li><li>Apply adequate padding to prevent tissue ischemia, minimize discomfort and maintain spinal neutrality after removing helmet or pads</li></ul><p><strong>If the patient requires spinal motion restriction:</strong></p></td></tr><tr><td><ul><li>Apply a rigid cervical collar.</li><li>Allow ambulatory patients to sit on stretcher and then lie flat. "Standing Take-Down" is eliminated. </li><li>Position back boarded patient on stretcher them remove backboard by using log roll or lift-and-slide technique.</li><li>Situations or treatments priorities may require the patient to remain on a rigid vacuum mattress or backboard including the combative patient, elevated intracranial pressure (see Traumatic Brain Injury) or rapid transport of unstable patient.</li><li>With the patient lying flat, secure the patient firmly with all the stretcher straps and leave the collar in place. Instruct patients to avoid moving their heads or neck as much as possible.</li><li>If the patient poorly tolerates the collar (e.g., due to anxiety, shortness of breath, torticollis), replace with towell roll and/or padding.</li><li>Patients with nausea or vomiting may be placed in a leteral recumbent position. Maintain neutral head position with manual stabilization, padding/pillows, and/or patient's arm.</li></ul></td></tr></tbody></table>

{% hint style="warning" %}
**Red Flag:** Mechanisms that indicate a high risk for spinal injury include:

* Motor vehicle crash > 60 mph, rollover, ejection.
* Falls > 3 feet/5 stairs (patient standing with feet 3' above the floor).
* Axial load to head/neck (e.g., diving accident, heavy object falling onto head, contact sports).
* Significant injury or mechanisms of injury above the clavicle.
* Injuries involving motorized recreational vehicles.
* Bicycle struck/collision.
{% endhint %}
